=pod

=head1 NAME

B<rwaggbagcat> - Output a binary Aggregate Bag file as text

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  rwaggbagcat [--fields=FIELDS
        [--missing-field=FIELD=STRING [--missing-field=FIELD=STRING...]]]
        [--timestamp-format=FORMAT] [--ip-format=FORMAT]
        [--integer-sensors] [--integer-tcp-flags]
        [--no-titles] [--no-columns] [--column-separator=C]
        [--no-final-delimiter] [{--delimited | --delimited=C}]
        [--output-path=PATH] [--pager=PAGER_PROG]
        [--site-config-file=FILENAME]
        [AGGBAGFILE [AGGBAGFILE...]]

  rwaggbagcat --help

  rwaggbagcat --help-fields

  rwaggbagcat --version

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<rwaggbagcat> reads a binary Aggregate Bag as created by
B<rwaggbag(1)> or B<rwaggbagbuild(1)>, converts it to text, and
outputs it to the standard output, the pager, or the specified file.

As of SiLK 3.22.0, B<rwaggbagcat> accepts a B<--fields> switch to
control the order in which the fields are printed.

B<rwaggbagcat> reads the I<AGGBAGFILE>s specified on the command line;
if no I<AGGBAGFILE> arguments are given, B<rwaggbagcat> attempts to
read an Aggregate Bag from the standard input.  To read the standard
input in addition to the named files, use C<-> or C<stdin> as an
I<AGGBAGFILE> name.  If any input does not contain an Aggregate Bag
file, B<rwaggbagcat> prints an error to the standard error and exits
abnormally.

When multiple I<AGGBAGFILE>s are specified on the command line, each
is handled individually.  To process the files as a single Aggregate
Bag, use B<rwaggbagtool(1)> to combine the Aggregate Bags and pipe the
output of B<rwaggbagtool> into B<rwaggbagcat>.  Using B<--fields> in
this situation allows for a consistent output across the multiple
files and causes the titles to appear only once.  No value is printed
if B<--fields> names a key or counter that is not present in one of
the files.

=head1 OPTIONS

Option names may be abbreviated if the abbreviation is unique or is an
exact match for an option.  A parameter to an option may be specified
as B<--arg>=I<param> or S<B<--arg> I<param>>, though the first form is
required for options that take optional parameters.

=over 4

=item B<--fields>=I<FIELDS>

Print only the key and/or counter fields given in this comma separated
list.  Fields are printed in the order given in I<FIELDS>, and keys
and counters may appear in any order or not at all.  Specifying
B<--fields> only changes the order in which the columns are printed,
it does not re-order the entries (rows) in the Aggregate Bag file.  If
I<FIELDS> includes fields not present in an input Aggregate Bag file,
prints the string specified for that field by B<--missing-field> or an
empty value.  The title line is printed only one time even if multiple
Aggregate Bag files are read.

The names of the fields that may appear in I<FIELDS> are:

=over 4

=item sIPv4

source IP address, IPv4 only

=item dIPv4

destination IP address, IPv4 only

=item nhIPv4

next hop IP address, IPv4 only

=item any-IPv4

a generic IPv4 address

=item sIPv6

source IP address, IPv6 only

=item dIPv6

destination IP address, IPv6 only

=item nhIPv6

next hop IP address, IPv6 only

=item any-IPv6

a generic IPv6 address

=item sPort

source port

=item dPort

destination port

=item any-port

a generic port

=item protocol

IP protocol

=item packets

packet count

=item bytes

byte count

=item flags

bit-wise OR of TCP flags over all packets

=item initialFlags

TCP flags on the first packet

=item sessionFlags

bit-wise OR of TCP flags on the second through final packet

=item sTime

starting time in seconds

=item eTime

ending time in seconds

=item any-time

a generic time in seconds

=item duration

duration of flow

=item sensor

sensor name or ID at the collection point

=item class

class at collection point

=item type

type at collection point

=item input

router SNMP ingress interface or vlanId

=item output

router SNMP egress interface or postVlanId

=item any-snmp

a generic SNMP value

=item attribute

flow attributes set by the flow generator

=item application

guess as to the content of the flow

=item icmpType

ICMP type

=item icmpCode

ICMP code

=item scc

the country code of the source

=item dcc

the country code of the destination

=item any-cc

a generic country code

=item custom-key

a generic key

=item records

counter: count of records that match the key

=item sum-packets

counter: sum of packet counts

=item sum-bytes

counter: sum of byte counts

=item sum-duration

counter: sum of duration values

=item custom-counter

counter: a generic counter

=back

I<Since SiLK 3.22.0>.

=for comment
##########################################################################
# The end of the --fields help

=item B<--missing-field>=I<FIELD>B<=>I<STRING>

When B<--fields> is active, print I<STRING> as the value for I<FIELD>
when I<FIELD> is not present in the input Aggregate Bag file.  The
default value is the empty string.  The switch may be repeated to set
the missing value string for multiple fields.  B<rwaggbagcat> exits
with an error if I<FIELD> is not present in B<--fields> or if this
switch is specified but B<--fields> is not.  I<STRING> may be any
string.
I<Since SiLK 3.22.0>.

=item B<--timestamp-format>=I<FORMAT>

Specify the format, timezone, and/or modifier to use when printing
timestamps.  When this switch is not specified, the
SILK_TIMESTAMP_FORMAT environment variable is checked for a format,
timezone, and modifier.  If it is empty or contains invalid values,
timestamps are printed in the default format, and the timezone is UTC
unless SiLK was compiled with local timezone support.  I<FORMAT> is a
comma-separated list of a format, a timezone, and/or a modifier.  The
format is one of:

=over 4

=item default

Print the timestamps as I<YYYY>/I<MM>/I<DD>TI<hh>:I<mm>:I<ss>.I<sss>.

=item iso

Print the timestamps as I<YYYY>-I<MM>-I<DD> I<hh>:I<mm>:I<ss>.I<sss>.

=item m/d/y

Print the timestamps as I<MM>/I<DD>/I<YYYY> I<hh>:I<mm>:I<ss>.I<sss>.

=item epoch

Print the timestamps as the number of seconds since 00:00:00 UTC on
1970-01-01.

=back

When a timezone is specified, it is used regardless of the default
timezone support compiled into SiLK.  The timezone is one of:

=over 4

=item utc

Use Coordinated Universal Time to print timestamps.

=item local

Use the TZ environment variable or the local timezone.

=back

=item B<--ip-format>=I<FORMAT>

Specify how IP addresses are printed, where I<FORMAT> is a
comma-separated list of the arguments described below.  When this
switch is not specified, the SILK_IP_FORMAT environment variable is
checked for a value and that format is used if it is valid.  The
default I<FORMAT> is C<canonical>.

=over 4

=item canonical

Print IP addresses in the canonical format.  If the column is IPv4,
use dot-separated decimal (C<192.0.2.1>).  If the column is IPv6, use
colon-separated hexadecimal (C<2001:db8::1>) or a mixed IPv4-IPv6
representation for IPv4-mapped IPv6 addresses (the ::ffff:0:0/96
netblock, e.g., C<::ffff:192.0.2.1>) and IPv4-compatible IPv6
addresses (the ::/96 netblock other than ::/127, e.g.,
C<::192.0.2.1>).

=item no-mixed

Print IP addresses in the canonical format (C<192.0.2.1> or
C<2001:db8::1>) but do not used the mixed IPv4-IPv6 representations.
For example, use C<::ffff:c000:201> instead of C<::ffff:192.0.2.1>.
I<Since SiLK 3.17.0>.

=item decimal

Print IP addresses as integers in decimal format.  For example, print
C<192.0.2.1> and C<2001:db8::1> as C<3221225985> and
C<42540766411282592856903984951653826561>, respectively.

=item hexadecimal

Print IP addresses as integers in hexadecimal format.  For example,
print C<192.0.2.1> and C<2001:db8::1> as C<c00000201> and
C<20010db8000000000000000000000001>, respectively.

=item zero-padded

Make all IP address strings contain the same number of characters by
padding numbers with leading zeros.  For example, print C<192.0.2.1>
and C<2001:db8::1> as C<192.000.002.001> and
C<2001:0db8:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0001>, respectively.  For IPv6
addresses, this setting implies C<no-mixed>, so that
C<::ffff:192.0.2.1> is printed as
C<0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:ffff:c000:0201>.  As of SiLK 3.17.0, may be
combined with any of the above, including C<decimal> and
C<hexadecimal>.

=back

The following arguments modify certain IP addresses prior to printing.
These arguments may be combined with the above formats.

=over 4

=item map-v4

Change an IPv4 column to IPv4-mapped IPv6 addresses (addresses in the
::ffff:0:0/96 netblock) prior to formatting.  I<Since SiLK 3.17.0>.

=item unmap-v6

For an IPv6 column, change any IPv4-mapped IPv6 addresses (addresses
in the ::ffff:0:0/96 netblock) to IPv4 addresses prior to formatting.
I<Since SiLK 3.17.0>.

=back

The following argument is also available:

=over 4

=item force-ipv6

Set I<FORMAT> to C<map-v4>,C<no-mixed>.

=back

=item B<--integer-sensors>

Print the integer ID of the sensor rather than its name.

=item B<--integer-tcp-flags>

Print the TCP flag fields (flags, initialFlags, sessionFlags) as an
integer value.  Typically, the characters C<F,S,R,P,A,U,E,C> are used
to represent the TCP flags.

=item B<--no-titles>

Turn off column titles.  By default, titles are printed.

=item B<--no-columns>

Disable fixed-width columnar output.

=item B<--column-separator>=I<C>

Use specified character between columns and after the final column.
When this switch is not specified, the default of 'B<|>' is used.

=item B<--no-final-delimiter>

Do not print the column separator after the final column.  Normally a
delimiter is printed.

=item B<--delimited>

=item B<--delimited>=I<C>

Run as if B<--no-columns> B<--no-final-delimiter> B<--column-sep>=I<C>
had been specified.  That is, disable fixed-width columnar output; if
character I<C> is provided, it is used as the delimiter between
columns instead of the default 'B<|>'.

=item B<--output-path>=I<PATH>

Write the textual output to I<PATH>, where I<PATH> is a filename, a
named pipe, the keyword C<stderr> to write the output to the standard
error, or the keyword C<stdout> or C<-> to write the output to the
standard output (and bypass the paging program).  If I<PATH> names an
existing file, B<rwaggbagcat> exits with an error unless the
SILK_CLOBBER environment variable is set, in which case I<PATH> is
overwritten.  If this option is not given, the output is either sent
to the pager or written to the standard output.

=item B<--pager>=I<PAGER_PROG>

When output is to a terminal, invoke the program I<PAGER_PROG> to view
the output one screen full at a time.  This switch overrides the
SILK_PAGER environment variable, which in turn overrides the PAGER
variable.  If the B<--output-path> switch is given or if the value of
the pager is determined to be the empty string, no paging is performed
and all output is written to the terminal.

=item B<--site-config-file>=I<FILENAME>

Read the SiLK site configuration from the named file I<FILENAME>.
When this switch is not provided, B<rwaggbagcat> searches for the site
configuration file in the locations specified in the L</FILES>
section.

=item B<--help>

Print the available options and exit.

=item B<--help-fields>

Print the names and descriptions of the keys and counters that may be
used in the B<--fields> and B<--missing-field> switches and exit.
I<Since SiLK 3.22.0>.

=item B<--version>

Print the version number and information about how SiLK was
configured, then exit the application.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

In the following examples, the dollar sign (C<$>) represents the shell
prompt.  The text after the dollar sign represents the command line.
Lines have been wrapped for improved readability, and the back slash
(C<\>) is used to indicate a wrapped line.

The formatting switches on B<rwaggbagcat> are similar to those on the
other SiLK tools.

=head2 Creating and printing an Aggregate Bag file

First, use B<rwaggbag(1)> to create an Aggregate Bag file from the
SiLK Flow file F<data.rw>:

 $ rwaggbag --key=sport,dport --counter=sum-pack,sum-byte \
        --output-path=ab.aggbag data.rw

To print the contents of the Aggregate Bag file:

 $ rwaggbagcat ab.aggbag | head -4
 sPort|dPort|    sum-packets|           sum-bytes|
     0|    0|          73452|             6169968|
     0|  769|          15052|              842912|
     0|  771|          14176|              793856|

=head2 Reordering the columns

Use the B<--fields> switch (added in SiLK 3.22.0) to control the order
of the columns in the output or to select only some columns:

 $ rwaggbagcat --fields=dPort,sPort,sum-bytes ab.aggbag | head -4
 dPort|sPort|           sum-bytes|
     0|    0|             6169968|
   769|    0|              842912|
   771|    0|              793856|

The B<--fields> switch only changes the positions of the columns.  The
C<sPort> field is still the primary key in the output shown above.

The B<--fields> switch may also include fields that are not in the
input.  By default, B<rwaggbagcat> prints an empty value for those
fields, but the B<--missing-field> switch may be used to display any
string instead.  The argument to B<--missing-field> is
I<FIELD>=I<STRING> where I<FIELD> is one of the fields in B<--fields>.

 $ rwaggbagcat --fields=sipv4,proto,dport,sum-bytes \
        --missing=sipv4=n/a ab.aggbag | head -4
          sIPv4|pro|dPort|           sum-bytes|
            n/a|   |    0|             6169968|
            n/a|   |  769|              842912|
            n/a|   |  771|              793856|

=head2 Using --fields with IP addresses

When creating an Aggregate Bag file with the source IP address and
protocol as keys, B<rwaggbagcat> prints the columns in a different
order depending on whether the address is treated as IPv4 or IPv6.

When the key is the source IPv4 address and the protocol, the
Aggregate Bag is built with the source address as the primary key:

 $ rwaggbag --key=sipv4,proto --counter=records data.rw         \
   | rwaggbagcat
          sIPv4|pro|   records|
    10.4.52.235|  6|         1|
   10.5.231.251|  6|         1|
    10.9.77.117|  6|         1|

Reading the same file but treating the data as IPv6 results in
the protocol being the primary key:

 $ rwaggbag --key=sipv6,proto --counter=records data.rw         \
   | rwaggbagcat
 pro|                                  sIPv6|   records|
   1|                   ::ffff:10.40.151.242|         1|
   1|                   ::ffff:10.44.140.138|         1|
   1|                    ::ffff:10.53.204.62|         1|

In the latter case, the B<--fields> may be used to display the source
IPv6 address first, but the switch only changes the positions of the
columns, it does not reorder the entries (rows):

 $ rwaggbag --key=sipv6,proto --counter=records data.rw         \
   | rwaggbagcat --fields=sipv6,proto,records
                                  sIPv6|pro|   records|
                   ::ffff:10.40.151.242|  1|         1|
                   ::ffff:10.44.140.138|  1|         1|
                    ::ffff:10.53.204.62|  1|         1|

=head2 Removing the columns or the title from the output

To produce comma separated data:

 rwaggbagcat --delimited=, /tmp/ab.aggbag | head -4
 sPort,dPort,sum-packets,sum-bytes
 0,0,73452,6169968
 0,769,15052,842912
 0,771,14176,793856

To remove the title:

 $ rwaggbagcat --no-title ab.aggbag | head -4
     0|    0|          73452|             6169968|
     0|  769|          15052|              842912|
     0|  771|          14176|              793856|
     0| 2048|          14356|             1205904|

=head2 Customizing the IP and timestamp format

To change the format of IP addresses:

 $ rwaggbag --key=sipv4,dipv4 --counter=sum-pack,sum-byte data.rw   \
   | rwaggbagcat --ip-format=decimal | head -4
      sIPv4|     dIPv4|    sum-packets|           sum-bytes|
  168047851|3232295339|            255|               18260|
  168159227|3232293505|            331|              536169|
  168381813|3232282689|            563|               55386|

To change the format of timestamps:

 $ rwaggbag --key=stime,etime --counter=sum-pack,sum-byte data.rw   \
   | rwaggbagcat --timestamp-format=epoch | head -4
      sTime|     eTime|    sum-packets|           sum-bytes|
 1234396802|1234396802|              2|                 259|
 1234396802|1234398594|            526|               38736|
 1234396803|1234396803|              9|                 504|

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item SILK_IP_FORMAT

This environment variable is used as the value for B<--ip-format> when
that switch is not provided.

=item SILK_TIMESTAMP_FORMAT

This environment variable is used as the value for
B<--timestamp-format> when that switch is not provided.

=item SILK_CLOBBER

The SiLK tools normally refuse to overwrite existing files.  Setting
SILK_CLOBBER to a non-empty value removes this restriction.

=item SILK_PAGER

When set to a non-empty string, B<rwaggbagcat> automatically invokes
this program to display its output a screen at a time.  If set to an
empty string, B<rwaggbagcat> does not automatically page its output.

=item PAGER

When set and SILK_PAGER is not set, B<rwaggbagcat> automatically
invokes this program to display its output a screen at a time.

=item SILK_CONFIG_FILE

This environment variable is used as the value for the
B<--site-config-file> when that switch is not provided.

=item SILK_DATA_ROOTDIR

This environment variable specifies the root directory of data
repository.  As described in the L</FILES> section, B<rwaggbagcat> may
use this environment variable when searching for the SiLK site
configuration file.

=item SILK_PATH

This environment variable gives the root of the install tree.  When
searching for configuration files and plug-ins, B<rwaggbagcat> may use
this environment variable.  See the L</FILES> section for details.

=item TZ

When the argument to the B<--timestamp-format> switch includes
C<local> or when a SiLK installation is built to use the local
timezone, the value of the TZ environment variable determines the
timezone in which B<rwaggbagcat> displays timestamps.  (If both of
those are false, the TZ environment variable is ignored.)  If the TZ
environment variable is not set, the machine's default timezone is
used.  Setting TZ to the empty string or 0 causes timestamps to be
displayed in UTC.  For system information on the TZ variable, see
B<tzset(3)> or B<environ(7)>.  (To determine if SiLK was built with
support for the local timezone, check the C<Timezone support> value in
the output of B<rwaggbagcat --version>.)

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<${SILK_CONFIG_FILE}>

=item F<${SILK_DATA_ROOTDIR}/silk.conf>

=item F<@SILK_DATA_ROOTDIR@/silk.conf>

=item F<${SILK_PATH}/share/silk/silk.conf>

=item F<${SILK_PATH}/share/silk.conf>

=item F<@prefix@/share/silk/silk.conf>

=item F<@prefix@/share/silk.conf>

Possible locations for the SiLK site configuration file which are
checked when the B<--site-config-file> switch is not provided.

=back

=head1 NOTES

The B<--fields>, B<--missing-field>, and B<--help-fields> switches
were added in SiLK 3.22.0.

B<rwaggbagcat> and the other Aggregate Bag tools were introduced in
SiLK 3.15.0.

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<rwaggbag(1)>, B<rwaggbagbuild(1)>, B<rwaggbagtool(1)>, B<silk(7)>,
B<tzset(3)>, B<environ(7)>

=cut

$SiLK: rwaggbagcat.pod 0e0426562cda 2023-09-05 21:34:53Z mthomas $

Local Variables:
mode:text
indent-tabs-mode:nil
End:
